stellar collisions occur about every 10
000 years and are an incredible
spectacle
but they're only fascinating to watch
when they happen tens and hundreds of
light years away
if a star collides with our own sun it
will be a global cataclysm that will
leave no
chance of survival to anything if it
happens
it will most likely involve a rogue star
these are stars that aren't bound by
gravity to any galaxy
and move independently through space and
such a star has already paid a visit to
our solar system
to be more precise two stars
this is shoals star it's a binary system
consisting of a red dwarf
which weighs about 86 times as much as
jupiter
and a slightly smaller brown dwarf which
is 65 times heavier than jupiter
about 70 000 years ago these stars
approach the boundary of our system
the oort cloud it's a kind of shield of
comets and cosmic bodies that surrounds
our solar system
humanity was already around at the time
and probably began spreading worldwide
from africa
and they could have witnessed a dim red
light in the night sky
and even though scholes's star flew by
us at a distance of about
0.8 light years its gravitational field
strongly influenced the movement of
different cosmic bodies
but what if such a star didn't pass by
but went straight to the center of our
solar system
to the sun scientists say this
may happen in 1.3 million years
meet gliese 710 this star has 60 percent
of the sun's weight
and moves steadily towards us like
people 70
000 years ago we will be able to see the
light from this orange dwarf with the
naked eye
first gliese 710 will approach our
shield
the oort cloud the star's gravitational
field will capture some meteorites
and throw them in all directions the
number of meteorites falling down on
earth
will probably increase tenfold then
after that
gliese's 710 will move on to the planets
it will consume them one by one
scattering their fragments
all over the system and while small
meteorites wouldn't disturb us much
now we'll have a real threat on our
hands planet shards the size of a
meteorite that wiped dinosaurs off the
face
of the earth will zoom straight at us
the star is getting closer and closer to
the sun and if we somehow survive the
falling fragments of our former
neighbors
now gliese 710 will have zoned in on us
gravity and temperature will just tear
the earth apart
still this terrible sight will long
since have had no onlookers
humanity will have evacuated from the
earth long before of course
earth venus mercury gliese 710 has
approached the sun
the smaller star will orbit the big one
gradually closing in on it
in a spiral with time the two stars will
merge
and if their total weight exceeds a
certain value
a disaster will occur the temperature of
the rogue star
grows and nuclear reactions inside it
accelerate
little by little the inner part of the
star heats up to a critical temperature
and a supernova explodes in a few
seconds
all the substance of the star is
scattered into space
and a powerful explosion will wipe out
what's left
of our solar system but so far gliese's
is 64 light years away from us and
there's still a chance it will change
its route and pass by peacefully
and what if two more unusual stars
collide with each other
this is a neutron star it's very small
only about 12 miles wide
but its weight is comparable to that of
the sun
this ball is extremely heavy a neutron
star collision can generate one of the
most mysterious phenomena in the
universe
two neutron stars fall into each other's
gravitational field
as they move they gradually approach
each other in a spiral
and just as they almost meet two
different scenarios can unfold
if the weight of the two stars is
relatively small then after the
collision
their combined weight gives life to a
new neutron star
but if our participants are a little
heavier then
when they collide their weight exceeds
the critical point
and this creates a magnetic field
trillion times stronger than the earth's
all this happens in just one or two
milliseconds
and is accompanied by a blindingly
bright flash
this is a short gamma ray burst it's
considered the brightest
and most energetic electromagnetic event
in the universe
a black disk appears at the collision
site of the neutron stars
it's a black hole scientists believe
this is one of the possible ways of its
appearance black holes have so much
weight
that they warp the space and time around
them they have an incredible
gravitational force
if something gets too close to a black
hole it's unlikely to ever leave it
even the photons of light the fastest
particles in the universe
are unable to shake off the black hole's
grip
by the way an ultra massive black hole
is at the center of our milky way galaxy
it can weigh millions and billions of
times more than the sun
now we know how a black hole is born but
what happens if
two black holes collide astronomers have
already
seen such an event for about seven
billion years
two huge black holes were circling
around each other
gradually getting closer one had the
weight of 66 suns
and the other had 85 at the moment of
collision
the big black hole absorbed the smaller
one and grew even larger
the new black monster weighed as much as
142 suns
during the collision a huge amount of
energy was released
equivalent to the mass of nine suns the
energy gave the universe a hefty shake
and the vibration from the impact has
only recently
reached earth's telescopes but in 4.5
billion years
an even more significant collision will
occur our entire milky way galaxy
will collide with the andromeda galaxy
although andromeda
is 2.5 million light years away from
earth it's still
our closest neighbor our universe is
expanding
and there's movement inside it
scientists have found that andromeda
is moving in our direction at a speed of
74 miles per second
so in about 3 billion years stars and
hot gas of this galaxy
will be visible to us with unaided eyes
then it will crash into our own galaxy
within one or two more billion years
the duo will move around each other like
a yo-yo they will approach one another
and then pass by
at a very close distance at an
incredible speed
they will begin to move away from each
other but the force of gravity will
bring them back
and then another collision will begin
but this time they will form one giant
galaxy
called milkomeda or milkdromeda
it's hard to predict what will happen to
us and our planet
in one scenario we may not even notice
the consequences of the collision
despite the galaxies being full of stars
and other celestial bodies
they still consist mostly of emptiness
stars are
really far away from each other for
example
if we imagine that our sun is the size
of a coin
then the nearest star proxima centauri
would be as far as the distance from
philadelphia to detroit
that's about 450 miles so there's lots
of space between the stars and the
galaxies
the second possible scenario is when our
solar system
is left alone in dark space when
galaxies collide and circle around each
other
a lot of stars will be ejected as if
from a catapult
look at the merry-go-round in an
amusement park when it spins
the centrifugal force pushes the swings
out
and if you unhook the swings while it's
spinning it will fly away
really far the same phenomenon occurs
with many stars during galactic
collisions
and our sun might be among them
in this case we will hardly notice the
difference life on earth will continue
at its usual pace
the only disadvantage is that our usual
night sky
will begin to disappear and in time it
will turn into a black void
the last and most unlikely option is
that our solar system will collide with
another star
well in this case all life on earth will
be doomed
just as if a star like gliese 710 would
crash into the sun